Latent Class Transliteration based on Source Language Origin

Masato Hagiwara

Satoshi Sekine

Rakuten Institute of Technology, New York
Rakuten Institute of Technology, New York
215 Park Avenue South, New York, NY
215 Park Avenue South, New York, NY
masato.hagiwara@mail.rakuten.com satoshi.b.sekine@mail.rakuten.com

Abstract
Transliteration, a rich source of proper noun
spelling variations, is usually recognized by
phonetic- or spelling-based models. However, a single model cannot deal with different words from different language origins,
e.g., “get” in “piaget” and “target.” Li et
al. (2007) propose a method which explicitly
models and classiﬁes the source language origins and switches transliteration models accordingly. This model, however, requires an
explicitly tagged training set with language
origins. We propose a novel method which
models language origins as latent classes. The
parameters are learned from a set of transliterated word pairs via the EM algorithm. The
experimental results of the transliteration task
of Western names to Japanese show that the
proposed model can achieve higher accuracy
compared to the conventional models without
latent classes.

1

Introduction

Transliteration (e.g., “バラクオバマ baraku obama /
Barak Obama”) is phonetic translation between languages with different writing systems. Words are
often transliterated when imported into differet languages, which is a major cause of spelling variations
of proper nouns in Japanese and many other languages. Accurate transliteration is also the key to
robust machine translation systems.
Phonetic-based rewriting models (Knight and
Jonathan, 1998) and spelling-based supervised models (Brill and Moore, 2000) have been proposed for

recognizing word-to-word transliteration correspondence. These methods usually learn a single model
given a training set. However, single models cannot
deal with words from multiple language origins. For
example, the “get” parts in “piaget / ピアジェ piaje”
(French origin) and “target / ターゲット t¯ getto”
a
(English origin) may differ in how they are transliterated depending on their origins.
Li et al. (2007) tackled this issue by proposing a
class transliteration model, which explicitly models
and classiﬁes origins such as language and genders,
and switches corresponding transliteration model.
This method requires training sets of transliterated
word pairs with language origin. However, it is difﬁcult to obtain such tagged data, especially for proper
nouns, a rich source of transliterated words. In addition, the explicitly tagged language origins are not
necessarily helpful for loanwords. For example, the
word “spaghetti” (Italian origin) can also be found
in an English dictionary, but applying an English
model can lead to unwanted results.
In this paper, we propose a latent class transliteration model, which models the source language origin as unobservable latent classes and applies appropriate transliteration models to given transliteration
pairs. The model parameters are learned via the EM
algorithm from training sets of transliterated pairs.
We expect that, for example, a latent class which is
mostly occupied by Italian words would be assigned
to “spaghetti / スパゲティ supageti” and the pair will
be correctly recognized.
In the evaluation experiments, we evaluated the
accuracy in estimating a corresponding Japanese
transliteration given an unknown foreign word,

